Add Kubernetes Dashboard to Headlamp guide blog (#55102)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/kubernetes-dashboard-to-headlamp/index.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes Dashboard to Headlamp: A Step-by-Step Guide"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes Dashboard to Headlamp: A High Level Overview"
```

draft: true
date: 2026-04-01T10:00:00+08:00
slug: kubernetes-dashboard-to-headlamp
author: >
  Vincent T. (Microsoft)
---

## 1. Before you start: know what is changing

> Kubernetes Dashboard and Headlamp both show what is running in a cluster, but they work differently. When Headlamp runs on the desktop, it uses your existing kubeconfig to connect to one or more clusters and can be extended with plugins. When Headlamp runs inside a cluster, it uses a Kubernetes ServiceAccount to access the API and follow RBAC rules. Kubernetes Dashboard, in contrast, only runs in-cluster and always relies on service account tokens. Understanding these models early helps you choose the right setup and permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Headlamp is an extensible Kubernetes UI that blends traditional features and views from the Kubernetes Dashboard with added functionality. Similar to Dashboard, Headlamp can run in-cluster via a web browser. Headlamp can also be run as a desktop application that uses the existing kubeconfig and allows users to manage multiple, unrelated clusters locally. 
```

### 1.1 How Kubernetes Dashboard works

> Dashboard is a web app that runs inside your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Dashboard is installed in the cluster and viewed through a web browser. It can be accessed with 'kubectl port-forward' or an ingress. Logging in requires a Bearer token from a service account. Users can create resources with forms and can navigate those resources using lists and tables in the UI.
```

Reviewer: I'm suggesting using this paragraph to replace the following unordered list in this section. I think this might help some of these sections to read more like a blog.

- You install it in the cluster, often with Helm.
- You usually run one Dashboard per cluster.
- You often reach it with `kubectl port-forward` or an ingress.
- You log in with a Bearer token. That token is often from a service account.
- It includes forms that help you create resources.
- It leans on tables and lists for navigation.

It feels like this: a UI that lives with the cluster.

### 1.2 How Headlamp works

> Headlamp acts more like a Kubernetes client with a UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Headlamp acts more like a Kubernetes client with a UI. It allows users to view multiple clusters in one local desktop view with list views and visual maps, and it can be extended with plugins to add features. Headlight favors YAML when creating or changing resources.
```

Reviewer: Again, suggesting to replace following unordered list with a paragraph. Leaving out redundant info from earlier.

- It can run on your desktop or in a cluster.
- It reads your kubeconfig, like kubectl does.
- It can show more than one cluster in one place.
- It favors YAML when you create or change resources.
- It includes list views and a visual map.
- You can add features with plugins.

> Headlamp is a UI that follows your identity, not your cluster.

Reviewer: Probably best to leave this line out -- sounds AI-generated and doesn't add much.

> ### 1.3 What stays the same

Reviewer: Consider getting rid of headers 1.3 and 1.4 and just making this one section under header 1.2

> Many workflows will feel familiar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflows in Headlamp remain largely unchanged. You can still browse workloads and resources, filter by namespace, view logs, and inspect YAML files, events, and statuses. The differences are that login shifts from pasted to kubeconfig, and creation is handled via "apply YAML" instead of the forms in Dashboard.
```

Reviewer: Paragraph replaces following 2 unordered lists.

- Browse workloads and resources
- Filter by namespace
- Inspect YAML, events, and status
- View logs
- Take actions your RBAC allows

### 1.4 What changes

A few things will feel different:

- Login shifts from pasted tokens to kubeconfig (and sometimes SSO).
- Creation shifts from forms to "apply YAML."
- Multi-cluster becomes normal, not a special case.
- The map view helps you see how resources connect.

---

## 2. Pre-migration checklist

> This checklist helps you avoid surprises during the switch. It makes sure Headlamp can use the same identity and permissions you already trust in Kubernetes. It also gives you a quick way to prove the migration worked before you turn off Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before disabling Dashboard, use the following checklist to ensure that Headlamp can use your identity and permissions, and to confirm that migration was successful.
```

> ### 2.1 Write down what you use today

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.1 Note current use cases
```

> List the basics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

- Which clusters you use (dev, staging, prod)
- Which namespaces you touch most
- What you do most often (view, edit, scale, delete, debug)
- How you access Dashboard today (port-forward or ingress)

> - How you log in (service account token, and which RBAC bindings)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How you log in (service account token and RBAC bindings)
```

> This is your baseline.

Reviewer: Remove this AI-sounding line.

### 2.2 Check that kubeconfig works

> Headlamp uses kubeconfig, especially on desktop. Make sure yours works before you install anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Headlamp desktop app uses kubeconfig. Make sure kubeconfig works before you install.
```

Run:

```shell
kubectl config current-context
```

Then try:

```shell
kubectl get nodes
```

If you cannot list nodes, test in a namespace you can access:

```shell
kubectl get pods -n <namespace>
```

If these work, Headlamp can use the same identity and RBAC.

### 2.3 Pick a rollout plan

> There is no need to rush. Most teams choose one of these:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most teams choose one of these:
```

**Parallel rollout (recommended)**

> - Install Headlamp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install Headlamp and test out its functionality, while still keeping Dashboard installed. Once the new UI has been tested and your team is ready, remove Dashboard. This method is generally recommended as it is safer for shared clusters.
```

Reviewer: Replaces List.... Add detail to last sentence -- why is it safer?

- Let people try it
- Keep Dashboard for a short time
- Remove Dashboard after the team is ready

**Cutover**

> - Install Headlamp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the cutover method, Headlamp is installed, docs and links are switched over, and Dashboard is removed.
```

Reviewer: Consider adding -- What is the advantage of this method?

- Switch docs and links
- Remove Dashboard soon after

> Parallel rollout is safer for shared clusters.

Reviewer: Sentence can be removed here.

> ### 2.4 Decide where Headlamp will run

Reviewer: This whole section should be deleted -- everything here is repeated in section 3

You can use either option. Many teams use both.

**Desktop**

- Uses your kubeconfig
- Uses no cluster resources
- No port-forward needed
- Multi-cluster works out of the box

**In-cluster**

- Works well for shared, browser access
- Can be managed like other cluster apps
- Often paired with ingress and SSO

> ### 2.5 Note optional dependencies

Reviewer: Move this to section 3, after "Option B"

> These are common. You can handle them later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common dependencies include:
```

Headlamp can run on your desktop or inside a cluster. Both work well, but they fit different needs. Desktop is the fastest way to start because it uses your kubeconfig and does not run in the cluster. In-cluster is best when you need a shared URL and want the platform team to manage upgrades and access.

### Option A: Desktop (user-managed)

Desktop Headlamp runs on each user's machine. It reads the same kubeconfig you use with kubectl. This keeps access tied to each user's identity and RBAC.

**Why teams pick it**

- No in-cluster service to deploy or expose.
- It uses no cluster CPU or memory.
- It uses your kubeconfig and RBAC.
- It works with many clusters in one app.
- You do not need port-forward for day-to-day use.

### Option B: In-cluster (best for shared access)

In-cluster Headlamp is installed as a Kubernetes workload (often via Helm). This lets cluster admins manage it like other in-cluster apps.

- Cluster admins manage install, upgrades, and configuration through the Helm chart and standard Kubernetes tooling.
- Admins control ingress and can set up OIDC login for shared access.
- It supports shared use in team environments.

---

> ## 4. Install Headlamp (desktop and in-cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Install Headlamp 
```

> This section gets Headlamp running. Follow the path you chose in Section 3.

Reviewer: Both of these sentences can probably be deleted -- this should be self-evident from the headings.

> ### 4.1 Desktop install (fastest way to start)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4.1 Install Headlamp Desktop App
```

> Install Headlamp on your machine. Then open it like any other app. Headlamp reads your kubeconfig and uses the same identity and RBAC rules as kubectl.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install Headlamp on your machine using the following commands:
```

**Windows**

Install with WinGet:

```shell
winget install headlamp
```

Or with Chocolatey:

```shell
choco install headlamp
```

**macOS**

Install with Homebrew:

```shell
brew install --cask headlamp
```

**Linux**

Install with Flatpak (Flathub):

```shell
flatpak install flathub io.kinvolk.Headlamp
```

**Quick check**

1. Launch Headlamp.
2. Confirm you can see a cluster context.
3. Open a namespace you can access and confirm you can list workloads. Headlamp will only show actions your RBAC allows.

> ### 4.2 In-cluster install (shared access)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4.2 Install Headlamp in-cluster
```

**Install with Helm**

Add the repo and update:

```shell
helm repo add headlamp https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/headlamp/
helm repo update
```

Create a namespace (example):

```shell
kubectl create namespace headlamp
```

Install the chart:

```shell
helm install headlamp headlamp/headlamp --namespace headlamp
```

**Install with a YAML manifest (optional)**

Headlamp also provides a YAML manifest you can apply and then adjust to your needs.

**Check the install**

Confirm the pod is running:

```shell
kubectl get pods -n headlamp
```

Confirm the service exists:

```shell
kubectl get svc -n headlamp
```

**Access it (two common ways)**

_Quick test with port-forward_

This is the fastest way to verify the service works:

```shell
kubectl port-forward -n headlamp svc/headlamp 8080:80
```

Then open: http://localhost:8080

_Shared access with ingress_

If you want a stable URL, expose the service through your ingress controller. Your exact ingress YAML depends on your setup. Headlamp's OIDC callback URL is your public URL plus `/oidc-callback`, so ingress and TLS settings matter.

### 4.3 Updating Headlamp

> Updates depend on how you installed Headlamp. Package managers upgrade in place. DMG or EXE installs update by reinstalling the newer download.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates vary depending on how Headlamp was installed. Package managers upgrade in place. DMG or EXE installs update by reinstalling the newer download.
```

**macOS**

If you installed with Homebrew, run:

```shell
brew upgrade headlamp
```

If you installed from a DMG, download the newest DMG and drag Headlamp into `/Applications`, replacing the old version. DMG installs do not auto upgrade.

**Windows**

If you installed with WinGet, run:

```shell
winget upgrade headlamp
```

If you installed with Chocolatey, run:

```shell
choco upgrade headlamp
```

If you installed from the EXE, download the newest installer and run it again. EXE installs do not auto upgrade.

**Linux**

If you installed with Flatpak, run:

```shell
flatpak update io.kinvolk.Headlamp
```

If you installed with AppImage, download the newest AppImage and run that file instead.

If you installed with a tarball, download the newest tarball, extract it, and run the new headlamp binary.

> ### 4.4 Notes for in-cluster access (keep it safe)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4.4 Notes for in-cluster access
```

> Treat an in-cluster UI like any other cluster-facing service. Use TLS, lock down who can reach it, and rely on Kubernetes auth and RBAC to control what users can do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Treat an in-cluster UI like any other cluster-facing service. Use TLS, set access permissions, and use Kubernetes auth and RBAC to control what users can do.
```

---

## 5. Authentication and RBAC

> Headlamp uses the Kubernetes API the same way kubectl does. Your cluster still decides who can do what. Headlamp only shows actions your identity is allowed to take.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Headlamp uses the Kubernetes API the same way that kubectl does. Permissions for user actions are still managed in the cluster. Headlamp only shows actions that are available to users based on their identity.
```

> This section covers two setups: desktop and in-cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following section covers authentication setup for desktop and in-cluster.
```

### 5.1 Desktop: use kubeconfig

> On desktop, Headlamp reads your kubeconfig and uses the same credentials you use with kubectl. There is no separate token login flow to manage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the desktop app, Headlamp reads your kubeconfig and uses the same credentials used with kubectl. There is no separate token login flow to manage.
```

**Step 1: Confirm your kubeconfig works**

Run:

```shell
kubectl config current-context
```

Then test access:

```shell
kubectl get nodes
```

If you cannot list nodes, test a namespace you can access:

```shell
kubectl get pods -n <namespace>
```

> If these commands work, your kubeconfig and credentials are valid for Headlamp too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If these commands work, your kubeconfig and credentials are valid for Headlamp.
```

**Step 2: Point Headlamp at the right kubeconfig (if needed)**

Headlamp can use the default kubeconfig path. It can also use a custom file path. You can set `KUBECONFIG` to choose a specific file.

Example:

```shell
KUBECONFIG=/path/to/config headlamp
```

You can also use more than one kubeconfig file at once. On Unix systems, separate paths with `:`. On Windows, separate paths with `;`.

**What to expect in the UI**

Headlamp adapts to your RBAC permissions. If you do not have permission to edit or delete a resource, Headlamp will not offer those actions.

### 5.2 In-cluster: shared access needs a sign-in plan

In-cluster Headlamp is shared by many users. You need a clear plan for sign-in and access. Headlamp supports OpenID Connect (OIDC) for a "Sign in" flow.

You will usually choose one of these patterns:

> - **A.** Configure Headlamp with OIDC (built-in).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configure Headlamp with OIDC (built-in).
```

> - **B.** Put an auth layer in front of Headlamp (common in enterprises).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Put an auth layer in front of Headlamp (common for enterprise).
```

> **A. Built-in OIDC (Headlamp)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Built-in OIDC (Headlamp)**
```

To use OIDC, Headlamp needs:

- Client ID
- Client secret
- Issuer URL
- (Optional) scopes

Your OIDC provider must also allow Headlamp's callback URL. The callback is your Headlamp URL plus:

- `/oidc-callback`

Example:

- `https://headlamp.example.com/oidc-callback`

> **Ingress note**

Reviewer: Consider removing this, and just making the following note a note.

> If Headlamp is behind an ingress or load balancer, make sure it forwards `X-Forwarded-Proto`. If it does not, Headlamp may generate an `http` callback URL instead of `https`. That can break login.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: If Headlamp is behind an ingress or load balancer, make sure it forwards `X-Forwarded-Proto`. If it does not, Headlamp may generate an `http` callback URL instead of `https`. That can break login.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes Dashboard to Headlamp: A Step-by-Step Guide"
date: 2026-04-01T10:00:00+08:00
slug: kubernetes-dashboard-to-headlamp
author: >
  Vincent T. (Microsoft)
---

> # Migrating from Kubernetes Dashboard to Headlamp: A Step-by-Step Guide

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
